hi my name is Theo Watson I'm an artist
and that has been sort of exploring the
intersection of art and technology for
just over about 10 12 years now I'm
co-founder a project called open
frameworks and worked on some projects
with the graffiti research lab but today
I'm going to talk to you about a project
that my studio design IO recently worked
on and design IO is four of us were a
pretty small team we were based in
Cambridge in Massachusetts up until very
recently and now we're up on a river in
Petaluma which is just north of San
Francisco we've done projects like funky
forest which is a kind of first project
together as a team and we've worked on
much bigger projects like connected
world in New York Hall of Science mimic
which is a robot arm that tries to have
an emotional dialogue with people who
are interacting with it and we just
recently finished a project called field
at the Franklin Park Conservatory and a
project called remnant that was
installed at the Telus world of Science
in Canada and so today I'm gonna talk
about project that we finished last year
that was a collaboration between BT
Wolff and Bell Labs and before I do that
I'm just gonna quickly see if they can
fix the display because it's very very
dark there we go okay so we were
approached by BT wolf who was releasing
a new album and she had been working
with Nokia Bell Labs in New Jersey to
kind of come up with a performance for
this anechoic chamber that they have
that existed since since the 1970s and
in a way it was the idea was to pick up
on this experiments not in technology
collaboration that Bell Labs was doing
in the 60s and so our kind of task was
to try and essentially generate a vr
album that would live stream
from the anechoic chamber at Bell Labs
and then in addition to that do like a
kind of a live Augmented performance so
that she could walk into the anechoic
chamber and perform for people who were
in the other room and we've done a
little bit in the area of sort of kind
of music and visualizations we had
worked on a project for John Lennon or
for Yoko Ono about John Lennon that was
sort of visualizing his music and so we
kind of knew that this was gonna be a
bit of a challenge especially as instead
of it just being a couple of tracks it
was a whole album so we sat down with BC
to kind of listen to his songs and try
and kind of generate a kind of
storyboard for the experience when we
listened to BT's music you know I'll be
like I picture this way I totally
pictured like these moths or these like
word forms there were a lot of times
when I described something and Emily had
actually written down pretty much
exactly the same stuff and then so we
went about kind of building kind of
storyboards and mood boards for each of
the tracks and you know we really wanted
each track to have a really different
feel the other thing that we needed was
we really kind of immediately locked on
to this idea that we would need to have
the lyrics kind of time coded to this
second because we wanted to do a lot
with her lyrics and so we didn't really
know a kind of easy way to do this
except for kind of manually time coding
and her track out so we built a tool and
open frameworks for doing scram concert'
me
and we found out that it was much easier
to timecode lyrics like a slow-speed so
we've spent old it's been hours now
there's an NRI producer spent a lot of
time and then here we made very early
done terrible 3d record player we were
also collaborating with some really
great artists
Joshua Goodridge he's based in Brooklyn
and this guy James Patterson who has got
just as an amazing amazing work and he's
you know kind of coming from an
animation hand-drawn background but he
got really into doing drawings and
animations in VR and so we realized that
we could kind of use him to sort of
generate visuals for the song this is a
very kind of cheesy picture of him I
probably doesn't like it but and then we
kind of found a pipeline for us to get
the stuff into open frameworks and these
are some very early experiments where we
were experimenting with like animating
his drawings or shapes based on the
color can tying colors to frequencies we
didn't end up using this but then you
know things like this where we would you
know we knew we wanted to have these
crows flying and so he would draw the
crows by hand in VR and you'd get these
things from him that just kind of blew
us away and then you're also kind of
building set pieces for the different
scenes this was a sketch he sent us of a
kind of street scene for a track that
had a kind of more noir feel and we got
really really excited when we saw this
turnout the last come over
so then Emily would have added textures
and some sequins everything we had this
very elaborate timeline where we could
kind of uniform stuff in and out animate
thing this is it's kind of the actual
render these drawings and then for how
can I which was sort of a Lennon
inspired track it was very kind of
minimal we wanted to have like these
shapes that would sort of you know come
out of kind of be tied to the music that
would wrap around BT and originally this
is something that James sent us but then
we sort of steered him more towards this
of abstract alphabet that could like
represent different sounds in the music
here you can see it's just this is
straight from the quill and then here
when we kind of actually pull it all
into the song there's a lot of kind of
like over/under renders like this so
when you sing in via the words would be
kind of floating right or right past
your eyes
another big part of kind of building
this album was trying to get bt into the
into the world into this sort of virtual
world and so we used James George's
death kit to shoot her playing her
tracks and then you know you get stuff
kind of that would look like this coming
out of it but then we were able to sort
of bring her in back into the anechoic
chamber
[Music]
and then we kind of had these other
tools like we made a kaleidoscope tool
that you could like load and reflect
anime it's a lot to come up with like 38
minutes of officials there's another one
of kind of mixing PNG sequences timing
stuff with particles and RGB captures
[Music]
so a big you know aspect of this was
that we were going to put this record
player in the space in an anechoic
chamber and it was going to stream for a
week straight and all the visuals would
be running live kind of in open
frameworks so we actually had to figure
out how do we like sync the record and
music with you know all the visual
content and someone on a mailing list
suggested using looking into linear
timecode and we actually ended up
finding one guy who thought that he
could H 38 minutes of linear time code
onto a single side of an acetate and so
here you can kind of see here what it
sounds like it doesn't sound pretty
[Music]
the time codes going out computer and
then playing back the audio file based
on where the time
you could like move the needle around
and it would actually react the same we
actually had the audio on one channel on
the left channel and the timecode on the
right channel so this was a huge relief
once we realized that we could actually
do this and then here is just showing
kind of the first time you connected it
to the album and oh you know we could
switch the track and suddenly the
visuals would jump it would reload all
the assets and everything so then once
we got that working it was about kind of
getting it working in the space and
getting it working with this 360 stereo
360 camera which is a total beefed and
kind of unwieldly
this is kind of us trying to get it
working in the office and this is what
you need actually to run it you need
this like custom server just to connect
to their camera
[Music]
so anyway this is what the camera was
sort of seeing in that space and you
know we had to kind of line our
understanding of the world up with what
the camera was seeing and see here you
can see that a model of the record
player and turntable are off we start to
sort of dial it in and eventually once
it's lined up we're able to like occlude
things in the space as if you know the
record player is the 3d object and we
also had to build like a stereo 360
renderer so we had like all this
bounding box stuff to be able to know
which which camera view needed to render
what and so you know we this so we
basically render out like a cube map for
each eye and then sort of stitch it all
back together with it was just all that
was sort of a nightmare it was really
really stressful but then eventually we
we got it working and this was the sort
of time and where
kind of kept it off for a week streaming
is so pretending totally on me but it
was a really nice relief and those this
sort of funny moment where suddenly like
everybody was pulling out their phones
and because you could count you if you
didn't have a VR headset you could set a
pan around the world and you can kind of
see on my phone kind of looking down at
the record player and then if you had a
VR headset some of you might recognize
these these two you would actually kind
of have a much more immersive experience
where you'd be in this forest hopefully
a butterfly wasn't flying through your
eyes
Nik had this bug where the origin point
where the butterflies was spawning from
actually inside of your head and that
was really really dramatic
to be fair I also reversed
[Music]
here my thank you
and bTW really enjoyed because it was a
live stream going in and sort of
photobombing or I guess like Stream
bombing or something the stream you know
it's just an empty room with a record
player but you know she could kind of
remember what was actually being shown
the strange guy pulling her around the
room
on the ground
[Music]
and then the other aspect of this
project was the live performance where
we she was going to step into the
anechoic chamber and people in the room
outside would be essentially be looking
through what would feel like a window
fire of projector into the space and so
we had a kind of a 4k camera that we
would try and get the kind of right
perspective to make it sort of feel like
a kind of window and then once we did
that we also needed to be able to track
her and be able to sort of mask her out
in depth so we could have graphics
moving around her we really this was
another thing that was really tough to
figure out where we had a you know our
kind of world and our kind of virtual
camera and we had to line our virtual
camera up with the perspective that the
camera the video camera was getting and
then on top of that actually get the
Kinect to then line up with that so it
was like getting three systems to sort
of line up but when it did this is very
crude and rough we could like mask out
foreground elements and have you know
things that were in the scene be masked
out by them and so here you can see him
like the shirt my shirt under on the
stool this sort of you know able to
include what's behind it so this was
this was a really happy moment for us
and then once we did that you know we
got that figured out we had to do that
in the Bell lab space so this is sort of
a debug for you to make sure we're lined
up with the perspective of the camera
and then you know Nick would often go in
and we would try and get the Kinect to
line up with the 4k camera and here it's
a bit more lined up I think and then
once it was lined up you know we would
sort of test kind of put on debug mode
and make sure that things were we were
tracking where Beatty was and we had
like a location for the head and
location for the guitar so this sort of
most like a stage like it was very much
like a theater stage in a way where we
had kind of relaying objects and scene
scene elements out and in the space and
then finally you know we would do these
kind of dress rehearsals with Btu and
make sure that we'd have to tell her not
to walk through the people that she
couldn't see
you know so that was kind of you know
took a bit of practice and then finally
it was time for the performance and
Beatty would start off in the other room
can it be introduced and she would walk
out to the door and then step into the
anechoic chamber kind of as if she'd
sort of gone behind the curtain and at
that point she would do her songs and
the audience would see you know the
graphics reacting around her and one of
the challenges was how do we stay in
sync because it's a live performance and
so we had a kind of feed of BT and an
audio feed which was so direct and what
we were essentially doing is like almost
like live DJing where we were like
slowing down the visuals and speeding
them up like you know just based on you
know we had I think we had the original
track in one area and the live track in
the other and so we were trying to kind
of line it up it was easier to do that
than to sort of find some algorithmic
way to do it so yeah finally that we had
the performance and I'll just show you a
little clip of that what you found the
red joy the fine ham you couldn't learn
you left it back in tattoo your despair
and tattooed your despair
you can see on our feet if you had a
notice you might see some of the things
on getting included probably there's a
little kind of to put you in a box
nothing can break your spirit try to
change you so so that's the kind of a
very quick overview of the Royal space
project and I think all the singles are
online and if you happen to have one of
those VR and like daydream things like
rift headsets you can go on in and
actually check them out and that's sort
of the recommended you know way to
experience it so thank you very much
really really enjoyed sharing this
[Applause]